Segmentation of Healthy Abdominal Organs with CT Segmentator

Vikas Chauhan

June 10, 2024

![Attachment.png](./images/media/image1.png){width="0.2222222222222222in"
height="0.2222222222222222in"}

Introduction

The ever-increasing number of radiological images leads to the need for
computer-based evaluation methods. One important building block for the
automatic analysis of radiological images is the segmentation of major
anatomical structures.

Current Challenges

Manually segmenting images is a laborious process, often leading
annotators to focus solely on the structures immediately relevant to
their research. Consequently, they create datasets tailored to specific
tasks, but not necessarily comprehensive enough for broader
applications. This approach has resulted in a proliferation of
specialized segmentation methods in the recent history of AI in
radiology. Unfortunately, the majority of these tools remain
inaccessible to the wider scientific community. Consequently,
researchers worldwide are continuously burdened with the arduous task of
reinventing the wheel, leading to redundant efforts and significant
time, cost, and resource investments.

Introducing CT-Segmentator

CT Segmentator is a powerful tool that can automatically segment 117
classes in the CT segment. CT Segmentator is trained on a large diverse
dataset of more than 1228 subjects. CT Segmentator can perform
three-dimensional volumetric segmentation of important body structures
rapidly and accurately.

![Attachment.png](extractions/19/images/media/image1.png){width="0.2222222222222222in"
height="0.2222222222222222in"}

Overview of all 117 anatomical structures which can be segmented by the
CT Segmentator

CT Segmentator can accelerate every AI and radiomics project involving
CT that requires segmentation. In many cases, Annotators can use CT
Segmentator as the first step in their processing pipeline.

Segmentation of Healthy Abdominal Organs

In this guide, we will be segmenting the Healthy Abdominal organ using
CT Segmentator which allows you to automatically segment up to 117
classes in the CT segment.

Taxonomy Setup

Let[']{dir="rtl"}s start by creating a taxonomy to define what all
organs we want to segmentate.

If you are planning to create more than 10 taxonomies, we recommend you
use the SDK method.

Create Taxonomy using SDK

create_taxonomy(name, study_classify=None, series_classify=None,
instance_classify=None, object_types=None)\[source\]

Create a Taxonomy V2.

PARAMETERS:

name (str) -- Unique identifier **for** the taxonomy.

study_classify (Optional\[List\[Attribute\]\]) -- Study level
classification applies to the task.

series_classify (Optional\[List\[Attribute\]\]) -- Series level
classification applies to a single series within a task.

instance_classify (Optional\[List\[Attribute\]\]) -- Instance
classification applies to a single frame (video) **or** slice (3D
volume).

object_types (Optional\[List\[ObjectType\]\]) -- Object types are used
to annotate features/objects **in** tasks, **for** example, segmentation
**or** bounding boxes.

You can access the SDK documentation
[[here]{.underline}](https://sdk.redbrickai.com/sdk.html#).

Setting up Project

Once we have taxonomy created, the next step is to create a new Project.

To integrate the CT Segmentator into your project workflow, you need to
activate it by clicking the slider button.

‚Äç

Once activated, begin mapping the taxonomy from the CT Segmentator to
your created taxonomies.

Uploading the Data

The dataset for this guide is from [[CHAOS - Combined (CT-MR) Healthy
Abdominal Organ Segmentation Challenge
Data]{.underline}](https://zenodo.org/records/3431873). The database
contains CT images of 40 different patients. These patients are
potential liver donors, who have healthy (no tumors, lesions, or any
other diseases) liver. The CT images were acquired from the upper
abdomen area of the patients at the portal venous phase after contrast
agent injection.

A small sample of this Dataset can be accessed from
[[here]{.underline}](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1FoHR4tjxKPsp7EmJAVHfNzyR0WR_eq1K)

We[']{dir="rtl"}re using the direct upload method to upload our data
here.

Automated Segmentation using CT segmentator

After uploading the data, the next step involves the CT Segmentator,
where the uploaded images are automatically segmented. Upon clicking
\"start labeling,\" you proceed directly to the labeling stage.

![Attachment.png](extractions/19/images/media/image1.png){width="0.2222222222222222in"
height="0.2222222222222222in"}

Automated Organ Segmentation using CT Segmentator
