**The Power of Digital Twins \| RedBrick AI Blog**

**Summarize**

![652d3b3988bbcf88c3b2f963_Blog Post Link
Images-p-500.png](extractions/9/images/media/image1.png){width="3.4722222222222223in"
height="1.8194444444444444in"}

**Introduction**

Unlike traditional evidence-based medicine, which relies heavily on
average treatment effects from randomised clinical trials, personalised
medicine aims to provide individualised treatments to patients.

By utilising advanced algorithms and AI, personalised medicine analyses
complex datasets containing genomic information, medical imaging, and
lifestyle factors to identify the most suitable treatment for each
patient.

At the heart of this approach is the creation of high-resolution
computational representations of individual patients, known as digital
twins, which allow for the simulation and testing of numerous drugs and
interventions to find the optimal treatment strategy.

**What are digital twins?**

Imagine a patient, Sarah, who has been diagnosed with a chronic heart
condition that requires continuous monitoring and treatment. In this
scenario, a digital twin is created to replicate Sarah\'s physiological
characteristics and disease progression by feeding all available data
including her medical history, lab results, genetic information and past
diagnostic imaging data to the virtual model. Sarah is provided with a
wearable device that continuously monitors her heart rate and blood
pressure and updates the digital twin real-time. The virtual
representation of Sarah that has now been created can simulate how
Sarah\'s heart responds to different medications and optimise her drug
regimen, offer personalized lifestyle recommendations to Sarah based on
her data and even allow surgeons to plan an operation more precisely.
Sounds impressive, right?

![652d3b2652b765be9221a6b5_Algorithm.png](extractions/9/images/media/image2.png){width="6.4998611111111115in"
height="2.7186920384951883in"}

In fact, the term digital twinning has been around for some time as a
concept from the field of engineering, which has been applied to complex
systems such as airplanes or even cities. Digital twinning revolves
around *in silico* (virtual) replications of a real object, system, or
process based on a variety of data collected from it by multiple
connected sources.

![652d2bc2da19a1a740d13053_New-York.jpg](extractions/9/images/media/image1.jpeg){width="6.4998611111111115in"
height="3.656172353455818in"}

Digital twinning or 3D reconstruction of New York

Through the vast amounts of data that is fed to the virtual model,
numerous simulations can be ran to predict treatment outcomes and
personalised prognosis for the real-life twin. As early as 2009, *in
silico* testing of an artificial pancreas algorithm that facilitated
continuous monitoring of blood glucose and insulin delivery was approved
by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as a substitute to animal
studies (1). Similarly, in 2011 the FDA approved *in silico* evidence on
the safety of a new cardiac pacemaker, which rested primarily on robust
mathematical modelling that was validated with bench studies and studies
in animals (2). One important difference is that the field of medical AI
has rapidly advanced alongside an exponential increase in computational
power and big data since that time, laying the foundation for a new era
of digital twinning.

**How are we using these AI-driven digital twins today?**

Creating digital twins requires a comprehensive understanding of the
physiological and anatomical complexities of specific organs and
systems. For instance, the development of a virtual heart would require
detailed modelling of the electrical propagation through the heart
muscle, the mechanical contraction of the heart chambers, and the
underlying structures of the cardiac tissue. In the past 5 years,
scientists have made considerable strides in this domain, resulting in
state-of-the-art virtual heart models. These models integrate cardiac
imaging data from MRI or echocardiography, along with computational
modelling of the electrical activity and genetic information, to provide
an accurate and personalised representation of the heart.

One example of such a virtual heart model that has gained the attention
of the scientific community is a model for the diagnosis of
arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC). ARVC is an
inherited disease of the heart that affects approximately one in 1,000
people and can lead to dangerous heart arrhythmias. Diagnosing and
predicting prognosis of ARVC in its early stages can be challenging. The
condition can affect individuals both with and without known underlying
genetic variants, and a considerable number of cases go unrecognised
until the first presentation with cardiac arrest. To address the
difficulty diagnosing and predicting prognosis of ARVC, scientists have
recently developed and validated virtual heart models for these
patients, integrating cardiac MRIs and genetic information. Using these
personalised virtual hearts, the scientists were able to unveil complex
mechanisms leading up to dangerous heart arrhythmias in ARVC patients.
In particular, the virtual hearts made clear that each patient has a
unique mechanism leading up to the onset of the arrhythmia, depending on
the presence and type of genetic mutations. In some cases, the virtual
models pointed towards scar tissue build-up, while in others, it was a
combination of slower electric conduction and structural abnormalities
in the heart. In this way, the digital twin was able to inform
cardiologists on the exact causes and mechanisms that lead to the onset
of dangerous heart arrhythmias for a specific ARVC patient, each with
its own severity and therapeutic implication (3).

Beyond the diagnostic and prognostic value of these digital twins, these
virtual hearts have practical applications in the management of heart
arrhythmias as well. Dangerous heart arrhythmias are typically treated
with catheter ablation, a procedure that delivers energy to specific
areas of the heart that are causing arrhythmias to occur. However, the
challenge of this procedure lies in the accurate localisation of lesions
in the heart that need treatment, which can lead to ineffective
ablations and an increased risk of the arrhythmias to recur. To
circumvent this, scientists recently developed digital twins with the
goal of providing clinicians with a roadmap for the treatment of these
lesions before the actual procedure (4). By simulating the delivery of
electrical stimuli to different parts of the virtual heart and observing
the propagation of this electrical current through the heart, they were
able to pinpoint the exact location of the heart lesions responsible for
the dangerous arrhythmia. The virtual model not only provided
Â cardiologists with more accurate mappings of vulnerable heart lesions,
it is also a non-invasive alternative that does not require any
incisions, puncturing of the blood vessels or sedation. The findings of
this study were published in the scientific journal *Nature Biomedical
Engineering*, and marked a major step forward in the prevention and
treatment of dangerous arrhythmias, in particular for patients with an
elevated risk of these arrhythmias already.

![652d2bdeb52b8f9549a66af0_Nature Biomedical
Engineering.png](extractions/9/images/media/image3.png){width="6.499862204724409in"
height="3.4846084864391953in"}

**What are the risks?**

With all the high expectations surrounding digital twins in personalised
medicine, it is natural to wonder why they are not yet ubiquitous. The
answer lies in the significant risks and challenges associated with
their widespread implementation.

First, the development of digital twins is extremely computationally
expensive. Creating accurate virtual representations of individual
patients demands a combination of mechanistic and statistical modelling
to fully capture the complexity of an individual patient\'s physiology.
This results in an incredibly high computational burden.

Second, the issue of explainability is a critical concern. As digital
twins rely on complex algorithms and AI models to simulate and predict
patient responses to treatments, the lack of transparency in these
models can hinder their adoption in clinical practice. Clinicians and
patients need to understand how and why specific treatment
recommendations are made by the digital twin, and the \"black-box\"
nature of some AI models can be a barrier to their widespread
acceptance.

**Round-up**

Digital twins are revolutionising the landscape of personalised
medicine. Gone are the days of one-size-fits-all treatments, as patients
now receive tailored care that can maximise their chances of treatment
benefit. As technology continues to advance, computational capabilities
improve and our understanding of these models grow, digital twins are
poised to play a crucial role in empowering clinicians and patients to
optimise clinical decision-making.

**References**

Kovatchev, B. P., Breton, M., Man, C. D., & Cobelli, C. (2009). In
silico preclinical trials: a proof of concept in closed-loop control of
type 1 diabetes. Journal of diabetes science and technology, 3(1),
44--55. <https://doi.org/10.1177/193229680900300106>

Faris, O., & Shuren, J. (2017). An FDA Viewpoint on Unique
Considerations for Medical-Device Clinical Trials. The New England
journal of medicine, 376(14), 1350--1357.
<https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra1512592>

Zhang, Y., Zhang, K., Prakosa, A., James, C., Zimmerman, S. L., Carrick,
R., Sung, E., Gasperetti, A., Tichnell, C., Murray, B., Calkins, H., &
Trayanova, N. (2023). Predicting Ventricular Tachycardia Circuits in
Patients with Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy using
Genotype-specific Heart Digital Twins. medRxiv : the preprint server for
health sciences, 2023.05.31.23290587.
<https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.05.31.23290587>

Prakosa, A., Arevalo, H. J., Deng, D., Boyle, P. M., Nikolov, P. P.,
Ashikaga, H., Blauer, J. J. E., Ghafoori, E., Park, C. J., Blake, R. C.,
3rd, Han, F. T., MacLeod, R. S., Halperin, H. R., Callans, D. J.,
Ranjan, R., Chrispin, J., Nazarian, S., & Trayanova, N. A. (2018).
Personalized virtual-heart technology for guiding the ablation of
infarct-related ventricular tachycardia. Nature biomedical engineering,
2(10), 732--740. <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-018-0282-2>

â
